# Cuda Toolkit

- cudart

## Cuda Library

- cuBLAS

The cuBLAS library is an implementation of BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms) on top of the NVIDIA®CUDA™ runtime. It allows the user to access the computational resources of NVIDIA Graphics Processing Unit (GPU).

libcublas-11-7-11.10.3.66-1.x86_64.rpm

- cuFFT

This document describes cuFFT, the NVIDIA® CUDA® Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) product. It consists of two separate libraries: cuFFT and cuFFTW. The cuFFT library is designed to provide high performance on NVIDIA GPUs. The cuFFTW library is provided as a porting tool to enable users of FFTW to start using NVIDIA GPUs with a minimum amount of effort.

The FFT is a divide-and-conquer algorithm for efficiently computing discrete Fourier transforms of complex or real-valued data sets. It is one of the most important and widely used numerical algorithms in computational physics and general signal processing. The cuFFT library provides a simple interface for computing FFTs on an NVIDIA GPU, which allows users to quickly leverage the floating-point power and parallelism of the GPU in a highly optimized and tested FFT library.

libcufft-11-7-10.7.2.91-1.x86_64.rpm

- cuRAND

The cuRAND library provides facilities that focus on the simple and efficient generation of high-quality pseudorandom and quasirandom numbers. A pseudorandom sequence of numbers satisfies most of the statistical properties of a truly random sequence but is generated by a deterministic algorithm. A quasirandom sequence of  -dimensional points is generated by a deterministic algorithm designed to fill an  -dimensional space evenly.

libcurand-11-7-10.2.10.91-1.x86_64.rpm

- cuSPARSE

The cuSPARSE library contains a set of basic linear algebra subroutines used for handling sparse matrices. The library targets matrices with a number of (structural) zero elements which represent > 95% of the total entries.

libcusparse-11-7-11.7.4.91-1.x86_64.rpm

- cuSOLVER

The API reference guide for cuSOLVER, a GPU accelerated library for decompositions and linear system solutions for both dense and sparse matrices.The cuSolver library is a high-level package based on the cuBLAS and cuSPARSE libraries.

libcusolver-11-7-11.4.0.1-1.x86_64.rpm

- npp

NVIDIA NPP is a library of functions for performing CUDA accelerated 2D image and signal processing. The primary set of functionality in the library focuses on image processing and is widely applicable for developers in these areas. NPP will evolve over time to encompass more of the compute heavy tasks in a variety of problem domains. The NPP library is written to maximize flexibility, while maintaining high performance.

libnpp-11-7-11.7.4.75-1.x86_64.rpm

- nvblas

The NVBLAS Library is a GPU-accelerated Libary that implements BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms). It can accelerate most BLAS Level-3 routines by dynamically routing BLAS calls to one or more NVIDIA GPUs present in the system, when the charateristics of the call make it speed up on a GPU.

- nvtx

The NVIDIA Tools Extension SDK (NVTX) is a C-based Application Programming Interface (API) for annotating events, code ranges, and resources in your applications. Applications which integrate NVTX can use NVIDIA Nsight VSE to capture and visualize these events and ranges.

The NVTX API provides additional information to improve presentation of data. In general, the NVTX SDK adds additional value to NVIDIA’s tools while incurring almost no overhead when the tool is not attached to the application.

cuda-nvtx-11-7-11.7.91-1.x86_64.rpm

- nvjpeg

A GPU accelerated JPEG codec library.

libnvjpeg-11-7-11.8.0.2-1.x86_64.rpm
